This lesson will cover how to delete,
copy, move, rename and compress files.
Eventually you'll get tired of all
the files you have laying around and
want to delete some of them.
To do that use the rm command.
rm space file name is the simplest
form of this command.
If you want to remove a directory and
its contents recursively,
use rm -r and the name of the directory.
If you want to force removal, use rm -f.
Search patterns can be used to
delete multiple files at once.
It's a good idea to double check what
you're going to delete with an ls command
before you actually run
an rm command against it.
In this example, you can see
that rm .* will not move '.' and
'..' which represent this directory and
the parent directory.
To copy files, use the cp command.
If you want to create a copy of a file,
you just run cp source_file
destination_file.
You can also copy a file or a series
of files to a directory by using cp and
then listing the file or files and
ending the line with a directory name.
To run cp in interactive mode, use cp -i.
If the destination file exists, cp will
prompt you before it overwrites the file.
If you use cp -r source_directory and
destination,
cp will recursively copy source_directory
into the destination directory.
If the destination
directory doesn't exist,
it will create the destination directory
with the contents of the source directory.
Let's copy a file with the cp command.
We'll copy file1 to file2,
and you can see that there are no
differences between the files.
Let's create a directory, and let's
copy these files into that directory.
So we can list as many files as we
want and when we end the command with
a directory, it will copy all those
files that we listed into the directory.
You can see that the files
are in the directory.
If you use cp -i,
it's interactive mode, and
it'll prompt you if
the destination file exists.
Do we want to overwrite file2?
Let's do a recursive copy on dir dir2.
Dir2 doesn't exist, so
cp creates dir2 and places
the contents of dir into dir2.
If we try to copy dir into dir3,
dir3 does not exist.
We'll see what happens.
And we see that copy skips directories.
Copy will only work on directories
if you give it a -r for recursive.
So let's create dir3.
Let's recursively copy dir and
dir2 into dir3.
You can see that the two
directories are in dir3.
To move or rename files,
use the mv command.
If you were to run mv source destination,
move will move the source
into the destination.
Otherwise source will
be renamed destination.
Like cp, mv has an interactive mode.
So if you were to run mv -i source
destination, and destination existed,
mv will ask you if you want
to overwrite the destination.
Let's use the move command
to rename a directory.
You can see that dir has
been renamed to firstdir.
Let's do the same thing with a file.
Rename file1 to file1.renamed.
Let's look at how move will handle
moving a file into a directory.
file1.renamed into firstdir.
You can see that the file
is now in firstdir.
This is the contents of file1.
This is the contents of file2.
If we run mv file1 file2,
that will rename file1 to file2.
It will overwrite file2.
You can see file1 is gone, because
it's been renamed and overwrote file2.
If you want to do this in
interactive mode, use -i.
And in this case it says, hey,
there's a file that already exists.
Do you wanna overwrite it or not?
You've already used the sort command
a couple of times in this course, but
as a reminder, the sort command at its
most basic level sorts text alphabetically
that appears in a file.
You can use sort with a -k option and
supply a field.
So you can sort by a different
field than the first field.
-r sorts in reverse order, and
-u removes duplicate lines and
only provides unique results.
Let's look at the contents
of more-secrets.
If we sort this file,
it will sort on the first column.
You can see that p comes before
s which comes before t, etc.
You'll also notice that there
are two duplicate lines.
So to remove those we can run
sort with a -u for unique.
And we see that we only get one tags line.
If we want to reverse the order, -r.
And if we want to sort
by the second column,
we can use -k2 for the second field.
And we could even combine options,
use the -u for unique.
Now you can see the second field, a,
comes before b, before c and before f.
If you want to bundle a group of files or
directories together in an archive,
use the tar command.
You may wanna create a copy or
a backup of a group of files.
You may also have several files that
you want to transfer at once or
transfer as a set.
In these situations tar can help.
You'll that notice tar does not require
a hyphen to proceed its arguments.
The hyphen or the dash is in brackets.
Traditionally the hyphen is excluded,
but tar still works with it.
So if you see tar cf file.tar,
it's the same as tar
-cf file.tar.
Some of the most commonly used tar options
include c to create a tar archive.
x to extract files from the archive.
t to display a table of contents.
v to be verbose.
z to use compression.
And f to specify the file
that you'll be working with.
Let's create a tar archive
of tpsreports directory.
So tar, c for create, f for
the file we want to use.
We'll use tps.tar.
And we'll supply the directory
that we're going to archive.
We can use t for list.
And it shows the directory and two files.
So let's move into the tmp directory and
extract the archive.
Extract, f for the file.
We'll give it the file name.
And you can see that it extracted
the contents into tpsreports.
If you wanna get a verbose listing of what
tar is doing, you can use a v option.
So we could have ran tar
xvf /home/jason/tps.tar.
And it will list the files
that it's extracting.
To compress files and
save space you can use the gzip command.
To uncompress the file you use gunzip.
And if you want to view the contents of
a zip archive you can use gzcat or zcat.
You can use the du command to display
how much disk space is used by a file.
So du -k displays sizes in kilobytes.
du -h displays sizes in
a human readable format.
So if the file is 5 megabytes,
it will say 5 M.
Or 3.7 gigabytes, 3.7 G.
Let's use the du command to see how
much space that this data file is using.
It's using 80K.
We can compress it with gzip.
When you compress a file with gzip,
it compresses it and
adds the .gz extension to the file name.
Let's see if that saved us any space.
And it did, 4k.
80 uncompressed, 76k compressed.
We can uncompress it with gunzip.
We can see it's back
to its original state.
If you wanna create a tar
archive that is compressed,
you can use the z option for compression.
We'll do c for create, f.
We'll name the file tps.tgz.
This is a naming convention.
You don't have to name files this way.
Sometimes you'll see it tps.tar.gz, but
tgz is short for
a tar that's been compressed with gzip.
We'll compress the tpsreports directory.
And if you want to work on
a compressed file you need to use z.
And it lists the files
that are in that archive.
In this lesson we covered
the rm command to delete files,
cp command to copy files, the mv
command to move and rename files and
directories, gzip to compress and
tar to create archives.